feat: introduce new centralized OTLP gateway architecture (#3148)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/user/architecture/traces-architecture.md

# Traces Architecture

For trace collection, the Telemetry module provides the OTLP Gateway. To control its behavior and data destination, you define a TracePipeline.

The OTLP Gateway is a DaemonSet with one instance per node that receives OTLP traces pushed from your applications. For details, see [OTLP Gateway](README.md#otlp-gateway).

![Architecture](./../assets/traces-arch.drawio.svg)

1. An end-to-end request is triggered and populated across the distributed application. Every involved component propagates the trace context using the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) protocol.

> 2. After contributing a new span to the trace, the involved components send the related span data ([OTLP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md)) to the OTLP Gateway using the `telemetry-otlp-traces` service. Because the Service uses node-local routing, the OTLP Gateway instance on the same node always receives the data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. After contributing a new span to the trace, the involved components send the related span data ([OTLP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md)) to the OTLP Gateway using the `telemetry-otlp` service. Because the Service uses node-local routing, the OTLP Gateway instance on the same node always receives the data. 
```

![Manager resources](./../assets/traces-resources.drawio.svg)

1. Telemetry Manager watches all TracePipeline resources and related Secrets.
2. Furthermore, Telemetry Manager takes care of the full lifecycle of the OTLP Gateway DaemonSet. The gateway is deployed when any pipeline resource exists (TracePipeline, LogPipeline, or MetricPipeline).

> 3. Whenever the configuration changes, it validates the configuration and generates a new configuration for OTel Collector, where a ConfigMap for the configuration is generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Whenever the configuration changes, Telemetry Manager validates it and generates a new configuration for the OTLP Gateway, which is stored in a ConfigMap.
```
